--- Page 1 ---

1
Cryptography in a  
Post-Quantum World
How organizations can safeguard against the looming quantum 
threat and prevent today’s encrypted data from being tomorrow’s 
biggest vulnerability
Abstract: Quantum computers are not yet able to crack encryption keys, but 
“Q-Day” is likely to arrive in the coming years. In the meantime, there’s the risk of 
harvest now, decrypt later (HDNL). In preparation, the US government and various 
standards bodies are actively pursuing solutions for post-quantum cryptography 
(PQC). This paper sets out several core concepts that one needs to know to navigate 
the process of preparing for PQC, with an emphasis on steps you can take today to 
help ensure a secure future.


--- Page 2 ---

2
Introduction....................................................................................................3
The Quantum Threat: Q-Day and Harvest Now, Decrypt Later.....................4
Government and Standards Bodies Respond to the Threat..........................5
The NIST Algorithms......................................................................................6
The Impact and Timeline of CNSA 2.0...........................................................7
Challenges to Implementation.......................................................................8
Emerging Solutions and Best Practices for PQC...........................................8
Protecting Yourself Today..............................................................................9
Protecting Yourself Tomorrow.....................................................................12
Conclusion...................................................................................................13
Contents


--- Page 3 ---

3
Introduction
Cryptanalytically relevant quantum computing (CRQC) is a quantum computer capable of 
breaking all public-key cryptography systems in operation today. This existential threat to 
data security known as “Q-Day” has not yet arrived as current quantum computers are not 
nearly powerful enough. However, many experts believe it’s just a matter of time before 
CRQCs become a reality.
Governments and forward-thinking organizations are already preparing for post-quantum 
cryptography (PQC). They are actively following guidelines for the quantum-resistant 
algorithms, such as those recently released by the US National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST). It’s a complicated topic to be sure.
This paper sets out several core concepts to help you better understand and navigate the 
process as you prepare for PQC, with an emphasis on network infrastructure, which is not 
typically the focus of dialogues around quantum security
3


--- Page 4 ---

4
The Quantum Threat: Q-Day and 
Harvest Now, Decrypt Later
Quantum computers use the principles of quantum mechanics to solve complex problems 
that are well beyond the capabilities of today’s classical computers. Instead of conventional 
bits representing either 0 or 1, quantum computers are based on qubits, subatomic particles 
that can be both 0 and 1 simultaneously, enabling them to process an incredible amount of 
information at once.
It is not necessary to understand the underlying science to grasp the potential significance 
and threat of quantum computing. When you use a computer or network device, you expect it 
to be trustworthy and operate as expected, without malware or other unauthorized changes. 
Cisco pushes to meet these expectations through its Trustworthy Solutions, an integrated set 
of policies, processes, and technologies to help ensure code running on Cisco hardware is 
authentic and unmodified, with unique device identity and validation of all levels of software, 
establishing a chain of trust for the entire system. Much of this relies on state-of-the-art 
cryptography, such as RSA-2048, which is considered invulnerable against brute force attacks 
using today’s classical computers. Unfortunately, a cryptanalytically relevant quantum computer 
(CRQC), when it becomes viable, could crack RSA-2048 in a matter of minutes.   
Quantum computing at this level of power does not exist and may still be years away. When the 
moment arrives, however, Q-Day will be a cybersecurity disaster for organizations that did not 
prepare for this eventuality. There is an additional and more immediate concern: the possibility 
that malicious actors could exfiltrate your encrypted data today, then use quantum computers 
to decrypt that data when CRQC becomes viable in the future. This is known as “harvest 
now, decrypt later” (HNDL). Given the prevalence of large-scale data breaches by foreign 
governments, it’s not difficult to imagine the risk exposure inherent in HNDL.


--- Page 5 ---

5
Government and 
Standards Bodies 
Respond to the Threat
The US government recognizes the seriousness of the quantum 
threat and the potential risks to national security inherent in Q-Day 
and HNDL. The Biden administration issued an Executive Order 
(EO) and National Security Memorandum (NSM) in 2022 to address 
the problem. The NSM directed the National Institute of Standards 
(NIST) to “publish new quantum-resistant cryptographic standards 
that can protect against these future attacks.” 
This process, which involved contributions from numerous scientists 
and institutions worldwide, culminated in the publication of three 
quantum-safe encryption algorithms in 2024. These algorithms are 
part of new quantum-resistant Federal Information Processing (FIPS) 
standards. 
The National Security Agency (NSA), working in parallel, issued 
a requirement that all companies and government agencies 
working with National Security Systems (NSS) implement accepted 
quantum-safe encryption by 2030, with preferred availability in 2026 
for network devices. The NSA specified the methods for realizing 
this goal in its Commercial National Security Algorithm (CNSA) 
version two (CNSA 2.0), which the agency published in 2022.
Technically speaking, the NIST and NSA standards only apply to 
entities that need to be FIPS compliant or work on NSS. However, 
for practical reasons, many organizations in both the private and 
public sector are pursuing the adoption of these standards, even if 
they are not mandated. Financial institutions, for example, feel an 
urgent need to be quantum safe, even if the government hasn’t yet 
required it of them.


--- Page 6 ---

6
The NIST Algorithms
NIST, which had been working on standardizing PQC countermeasures for six years prior to 
the EO and NSM, has settled on three post-quantum encryption algorithms in two distinct 
categories: general encryption and digital signatures. 
•   The CRYSTALS-Kyber algorithm (renamed ML-KEM by NIST) is for general encryption, 
e.g., for securing websites. CRYSTALS-Kyber is a “lattice-based” Key Encapsulation 
Mechanism (KEM) which uses highly complex mathematical structured lattice equations to 
create patterns of encryption that cannot be broken, even by a quantum computer. NIST 
selected CRYSTALS-Kyber partly due to its use of relatively small keys that can be easily 
exchanged.  CRYSTALS-Kyber also operates at high speed, which is advantageous for 
most workloads.
•   CRYSTALS-Dilithium and SPHINCS+ are for digital signatures, e.g., used to verify identities. 
CRYSTALS-Dilithium algorithm was renamed ML-DSA by NIST, standing for Module-
Lattice-Based Digital Signature Algorithm. Based on early reactions to the NIST publication, 
it is probable that the lattice-based CRYSTALS-Dilithium will emerge as the predominant 
standard. SPHINCS+, renamed SLH-SSA by NIST, uses hashes to create a quantum safe 
mode of encryption. 
These three algorithms are now part of FIPS encryption standards for PQC. FIPS 203, which is 
seen as the general standard for PQC, is based on ML-KEM. FIPS 204, which is for protecting 
digital signatures, uses ML-DSA. FIPS 205, also for digital signatures, uses SPHINCS+ or 
Stateless Hash-Based Digital Signature Algorithm (SLH-DSA).


--- Page 7 ---

7
The Impact and Timeline  
of CNSA 2.0
The NSA’s CNSA 2.0 defines the PQC algorithms and timeline requirements for products used 
in NSS. There’s a lot to CNSA 2.0. For the sake of simplicity, be aware that CNSA 2.0 requires 
algorithms that cover:
•   Signatures for firmware and software: Leighton-Micali Signatures (LMS) and  
Extended Merkle Signature System (XMSS), which are stateful and hash-based.  
CNSA 2.0 now also allows ML-DSA-87 for this purpose.
•   Signatures for identity and authentication, i.e., general purpose: ML-DSA-87,  
which is the level 5 security parameter set for ML-DSA.
•   Bulk encryption/decryption: AES-256
•   General system-wide hashing: Secure hash algorithm (SHA)-384 or SHA-512  
for hashing functions.
CNSA 2.0 specifies a timeline for adoption. The year 2030 is the “must have” date, but the NSA 
has said that it prefers for NSS to be protected perhaps as soon as 2027. As the chart below 
shows, PQC image signing and verification have a preferred adoption date of 2025. For network 
devices, it’s 2026.  
Preferred date of adoption
Required date of adoption
PQC image signing and verification
CY 2025
CY 2030
Network Devices
CY 2026
CY 2030


--- Page 8 ---

8
Challenges to Implementation
Industry consensus is favorable toward the new NIST PQC standards and CNSA 2.0. 
Stakeholders recognize that these algorithms represent the best countermeasures against the 
quantum threat. Challenges are apparent, however, most notably regarding the implementation 
timeframe. FIPS certification, for instance, can take up to two years or more. If an organization is 
concerned about HNDL, that’s a long time to wait. Similarly, with the rigorous testing envisioned 
for the new algorithms, adoption could be quite slow, compared with the urgency of mitigating 
HNDL risks as quickly as possible. 
Emerging Solutions and Best 
Practices for PQC
Solutions and best practices for PQC are emerging as the details and timelines of mandated 
standards have become clear. They offer an approach to quantum safe encryption that 
addresses the risks inherent in waiting for FIPS certification as well as testing and adoption of the 
NIST standards. 
In the near term, deal with the transport layer— One best practice is to establish a priority for 
PQC implementation based on risk. Given the HNDL threat, it makes sense to move as quickly 
as possible to protect the most sensitive data first. In practical terms, this means combining 
legacy cryptographic methods with alternate quantum-safe methods for provisioning bulk 
encryption keys (see Protecting Yourself Today).  Migrate to PQC-based solutions once they 
become available (see Protecting Yourself Tomorrow).
Then, implement quantum safe computing in hardware—It will take longer to deploy 
quantum-resistant modes of encryption in network hardware, such as secure boot, 
authenticated firmware updates, and device identity.  While many Cisco devices already 
include critical quantum-safe protections (such as LDWM for Secure Boot), no hardware 
exists today that is compliant with CNSA 2.0 algorithms. It is, therefore, recommended that 
organizations consider including quantum-safe hardware into their product refresh cycles as 
they become available.


--- Page 9 ---

9
Protecting Yourself Today 
Networks provide foundational protection from bad actors by using secure transport protocols 
(e.g., IPsec, MACsec, and TLS). These protocols use symmetric cryptography algorithms to 
encrypt and decrypt information. Symmetric cryptography is quantum safe if the keys used are 
of sufficient size and quality (such as with AES-256). Unfortunately, asymmetric cryptography 
is used to establish these keys and quantum computers are well-suited to breaking 
asymmetric key pairs. Therefore, organizations should assess the risk and impact of a harvest 
now, decrypt later attacks and begin work to protect their most sensitive data.
One solution is to use an alternative method for obtaining the keys used to encrypt/decrypt 
data—one that doesn’t rely on asymmetric cryptography. There are three methods for 
accomplishing this today:
   •   Manually pre-provisioned keys
   •   Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) systems
   •   Integrated Key Management Services (KMS)
Each of these methods produce Postquantum Pre-shared Keys (PPK) to ensure that currently 
encrypted traffic is safe against an HNDL attack.


--- Page 10 ---

10
Manually pre-provisioned keys
Here, an operator or network management system configures network devices with a 
quantum-safe key using existing technology. Simplicity and speed of deployment are 
two advantages of this approach. However, relying on manual processes can lead to “key 
entropy” and potentially risk key exposure.
Site 1
Initiator
Manual PPK
Manual PPK
Responder
Site 2
Manually Configured PPKs
Quantum-resistant
Limitations
• Manual key management
• Key entropy, length, refresh
Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) systems
QKD uses an external key management system to create quantum-safe keys. Network 
devices can request keys on demand through the Secure Key Integration Protocol (SKIP) API. 
While a QKD infrastructure includes added expense and complexity, there are numerous QKD 
offerings available in the market.  
Site 1
Initiator
Responder
Site 2
Keys via Quantum Safe Algorithms
Quantum-resistant
Limitations
• Standards not yet approved
PQC
PQC
Quantum Safe
Key Exchange


--- Page 11 ---

11
Integrated Key Management Services (KMS)
As the name suggests, KMS is a service integrated in the network device itself that provides 
quantum-safe keys on demand. While no additional infrastructure is required, there are a 
limited number of KMS-enabled products on the market. The Cisco KMS offering is called 
Session Key Service (SKS). 
Site 1
Initiator
Responder
Site 2
Keys via Cisco Session Key Service (SKS)
Quantum-resistant
SKS
SKS
QuantumSafe
KeyExchange


--- Page 12 ---

12
Protecting Yourself Tomorrow
PQC-based solutions using multiple (hybrid) or native (single) key exchange methods are 
being developed now, with many solutions becoming available in 2025. 
To ensure continued security in the face of the quantum risk, traditional cryptographic 
protocols such as Internet Security Protocol (IPsec), Transport Layer Security (TLS), and 
Secure Shell (SSH) are evolving to incorporate PQC algorithms—a critical adaptation to help 
protect against HNDL attacks sooner rather than later. 
•   Internet Security Protocol (IPsec)—The Internet Key Exchange version 2 (IKEv2) tunneling 
protocol, which is based on IPsec, establishes a secure connection between devices using 
multiple keys. Specific IKEv2 standards include RFC 9730, which enables multiple key 
exchanges, RFC 9242, the Intermediate Exchange, which uses IKEv2 for transmission of 
the large amounts of data, and the draft post-quantum Hybrid Key Exchange with ML-KEM 
in the Internet Key Exchange Protocol Version 2, which defines profiles for using ML-KEM 
with RFCs 9370/9242.
•   Transport Layer Security (TLS)—The draft Hybrid key exchange standard in TLS 1.3 
simultaneously uses multiple key exchange algorithms to ensure quantum-safe encryption 
even if all but one of the component algorithms are broken.
•   Secure Shell (SSH)—The draft Post-quantum Hybrid Key Exchange standard in SSH uses 
Elliptic Curve and ML-KEM schemes as key exchange methods with the goal of creating a 
discrete algorithm problem that is computationally impossible for hackers to crack, even 
using quantum computers. 
Multiple key exchange is required for IPsec and many in the industry, including Google, 
currently support it for TLS. Beyond the issue of interoperability with these vendors, Cisco 
and other industry leaders believe it prudent, at least initially, to use multiple key exchanges 
for transport protocols for the following reasons: 
	
1. While the PQC algorithms are believed to be solid, the software implementations 
and associated protocols are new. Even though they will be well tested, new 
vulnerabilities are typically uncovered over time.  By using multiple (or hybrid) key 
exchanges, you will have fallback protection with the legacy key exchange in the 
event there is an issue with the PQC implementation. 
	
2. Many organizations require products used in their environment be FIPS certified, 
however, as stated earlier, the current average time to complete FIPS certification 
of the PQC algorithms is two years or more. A hybrid approach using a FIPS-
certified legacy crypto algorithm for the initial key eliminates this delay.


--- Page 13 ---

13
© 2024 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco and the Cisco logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Cisco and/or its affiliates in the U.S. 
and other countries. To view a list of Cisco trademarks, go to this URL: www.cisco.com/go/trademarks. Third-party trademarks mentioned are the property of their 
respective owners. The use of the word partner does not imply a partnership relationship between Cisco and any other company.
Conclusion
While no one truly knows when Q-Day will arrive, organizations are advised to assess their 
risk and, if needed, prioritize quantum-safe measures to mitigate the immediate threat of 
harvest now, decrypt later (HNDL) attacks. Solutions exist today that provide this protection 
while the security sector waits for PQC-based solutions to become available. To begin, it’s 
essential to protect your most sensitive data by implementing hybrid cryptographic transport 
protocol solutions that combine legacy encryption with quantum-resistant algorithms. This 
allows for quicker FIPS-certified deployment while maintaining security in the event that 
future vulnerabilities are discovered in the new PQC algorithm. 
Additionally, organizations should evaluate and invest in quantum-safe hardware and 
consider including it in their product refresh cycles as they become available. Evolving 
standards here include unique device identity certificates. Industry availability for PQC-
capable hardware components such as CPUs and TPMs is also evolving. By acting swiftly 
and strategically, companies can safeguard against both current and future quantum 
computing threats. 
 
You can learn more about Cisco post-quantum cryptography capabilities on the Cisco Trust 
Center
