--- Page 1 ---

Cisco Trustworthy Technologies Data Sheet
Cisco Public
Cisco Trustworthy 
Technologies Data Sheet
Product Overview
Trustworthy solutions encompass Cisco’s commitment to deliver products and solutions with 
multilayered  security that protect against today’s threats. Trustworthy technologies provide a 
foundation of security and  resilience across Cisco’s solutions portfolio. Trustworthy technologies 
such as image signing, secure boot, Cisco Trust Anchor module (TAm), and runtime defenses help 
ensure that the code running on Cisco hardware  platforms is authentic, unmodified, and operating 
as intended. A hardware-level root of trust, unique device  identity, and validation of all levels of 
software during startup establish a chain of trust for the system.
How Do Trustworthy Technologies Enhance the 
Security of Cisco Solutions? 
Today’s sophisticated cyberattacks increasingly seek to compromise the network infrastructure 
by attacking devices like routers and switches. By doing so, attackers can eavesdrop on sensitive 
communications, steal or manipulate data, and launch attacks against other parts of the network. 
This includes advanced persistent threats that modify the hardware or software of network 
devices. These threats can go unnoticed for months, or even years, inflicting devastating damage.
Cisco trustworthy technologies provide product assurance functionality as well as foundational 
security capabilities which enhance the security and resilience of Cisco solutions. To protect 
against device counterfeiting and malicious attacks on hardware and software, Cisco uses digitally-
signed software images, hardware-anchored secure boot, Secure Unique Device Identifier (SUDI), 
and other trustworthy technologies to verify the authenticity and integrity of our solutions. Among 
other functions, trustworthy technologies run automated checks of hardware and software integrity 
and can shut down the boot process if compromise is detected. Cisco Trust Anchor module 
provides a Secure Unique Device Identifier, highly secure storage, a random bit generator, and 
secure key management. These added layers of security protect against counterfeit  and software 
modification; enable secure, encrypted communications; and verify that Cisco network devices  
are operating as intended.
© 2023 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.


--- Page 2 ---

Cisco Trustworthy Technologies Data Sheet
Cisco Public
Step 1
CPU
Microloader
Step 2
Microloader
checks Bootloader
CPU
Bootloader
Step 3
Bootloader
checks OS
CPU
OS
Step 4
OS launched
Step 5
Authenticity and
license checks
CPU
OS
Step 6
Trust Anchor 
module provides
critical services
CPU
OS
Software authenticity checks
Hardware authenticity check
First instructions run on CPU stored 
in tamper-resistant hardware
Hardware
Anchor
Microloader
Trust 
Anchor 
module
Trust 
Anchor 
module
Why should you 
choose Cisco?
Cisco is deeply committed to 
security. Cisco trustworthy  
solutions start with security-
focused development processes 
and standards-based technology 
and add security features 
which provide secure, resilient  
networking solutions. These 
security capabilities perform both 
system-critical functions and 
security functions, including 
proactive monitoring of the  
startup process.
Cisco works to continually 
enhance the security and  
resilience of our solutions. 
Verification of the authenticity and 
integrity of Cisco hardware and 
software platforms with 
trustworthy technologies  such as 
secure boot of signed images and 
Trust Anchor module reduces risk 
and helps protect against    
today’s threats.
Cisco has a dedicated team of 
engineers and security managers 
who work with Cisco product 
development teams to embed 
security across Cisco product 
lines. And Cisco uses the security 
expertise that we’ve gained 
defending our own global  
enterprise network to continually 
enhance the security of our 
business and our solutions.
Fundamental Concepts of Cisco 
Trustworthy Technologies
Image signing:  Image signing is a two-step process for creating a unique 
digital signature for a given block of code. First, a hashing algorithm, similar to 
a checksum, is used to compute a hash value of the block of code. The hash 
is then encrypted with a Cisco private key, resulting in a digital signature that is 
attached to and delivered with the image. Signed images may be checked at 
runtime to verify that the software has not been modified.
Secure boot:  Cisco Secure Boot helps to ensure that the code that executes 
on Cisco hardware platforms is authentic and unmodified.  Cisco hardware-
anchored secure boot protects the microloader (the first piece of code that 
boots) in tamper-resistant hardware, establishing a root of trust that helps 
prevent Cisco network devices from executing tainted network software.
Chain of trust:  A chain of trust exists when the integrity of each element of 
code on a system is validated before that piece of code is allowed to run. A chain 
of trust starts with a root of trust element. The root of trust validates the next 
element in the chain (usually firmware) before it is allowed to start, and so on. 
Through the use of signing and trusted elements, a chain of trust can be created 
which boots the system securely and validates the integrity of Cisco software. 
See Figure 1.
Trust Anchor module (TAm):  This proprietary, tamper-resistant chip is found 
in many Cisco products and features nonvolatile secure storage, Secure Unique 
Device Identifier, and crypto services, including random number generation 
(RNG), secure storage, key management, and crypto services to the running OS 
and applications.
Runtime defenses (RTD):  Runtime defenses target injection attacks of malicious 
code into running software. Cisco runtime defenses include Address Space 
Layout Randomization (ASLR), Built-in Object Size Checking (BOSC), and 
X-space. Runtime defenses are complementary.
Figure 1. Hardware-Anchored Secure Boot and TAm Verify Hardware and Software Integrity
© 2024 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.


--- Page 3 ---

Cisco Trustworthy Technologies Data Sheet
Cisco Public
© 2024 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.
Common Questions
How do I know that my hardware and software are genuine Cisco and that my system software has not 
been modified before or during boot up?
Trustworthy technologies give customers the confidence that the product is genuine Cisco. Cisco Secure 
Boot protects the boot code in hardware and uses a check of digitally-signed images to verify that only 
genuine, unmodified code boots on a Cisco device. The SUDI in the Trust Anchor module provides 
verification that the hardware is genuine Cisco.
How do you know that your device has implemented Cisco’s trustworthy technologies?
Trustworthy technologies are available today in many Cisco solutions. Our product teams design security 
technologies into their products based on the use case of the device. These capabilities are available in 
many Cisco routing, switching, wireless, server, and security products today, and we are designing them 
into additional platforms. We constantly review and adapt Cisco product security requirements as the threat 
landscape evolves. Cisco is committed to advanced security research and continues to innovate and develop 
new trustworthy technologies, which we implement as they become available. Please contact your account 
manager or sales engineer for your device’s security profile.
What’s the risk of not implementing Cisco trustworthy technologies?
The lack of a hardware-anchored root of trust has resulted in known hacks. Third parties can tamper 
with BIOS, boot loader, or ROM monitor (ROMMON) boot code to load modified software images; bypass 
hardware, authenticity, and licensing checks; or perform additional functions with malicious intent. Tampered 
code can also result in data manipulation, data theft, and can provide a platform to launch attacks, including 
denial of service (DoS). Cisco trustworthy technologies help close these potential security gaps.
Cisco also works with our suppliers as well as our manufacturing and distribution partners to address supply 
chain risks through our Value Chain Security program. This program takes a multi-layered approach to 
security that uses physical security practices, logical security processes, and security technology to address 
taint, counterfeit, and misuse of intellectual property. Our comprehensive program continually assesses, 
monitors, and improves security across the entire lifecycle of our solutions. We consistently strive to enhance 
security and earn the trust of our customers.
Immutable Identity—SUDI
The Secure Unique Device Identifier, or SUDI, is an X.509v3 certificate which maintains the product identifier 
and  serial number. The identity is implemented at manufacturing and is chained to a publicly identifiable root 
certificate authority. The SUDI can be used as an unchangeable identity for configuration, security, auditing, 
and management.
The SUDI credential in the Trust Anchor module can be either RSA or Elliptic Curve Digital Signature 
Algorithm (ECDSA) based. The SUDI certificate, the associated key pair, and its entire certificate chain are 
stored in the tamper-resistant Trust Anchor module chip. Furthermore, the key pair is cryptographically-
bound to a specific Trust Anchor chip and the private key is never exported. This feature makes cloning or 
spoofing the identity information virtually impossible.


--- Page 4 ---

Cisco Trustworthy Technologies Data Sheet
Cisco Public
Data-at-Rest 
Encryption and 
Decryption 
Functions Using  
Secure Keys
The Cisco Trust Anchor can also 
generate  key pairs that can be 
used for customer-controlled 
certificates commonly  called 
locally significant certificates 
(LSCs  or local device identity 
(LDevID) certificates.
Customer identity functions 
supported by  the Trust       
Anchor include:
•
Retrieval of LDevID RSA
public keys
•
Authentication with a
Certificate  Authority (CA)
before LSC enrollment
•
Zero-touch provisioning
authentication
•
Secure boot posture
assessment
The SUDI can be used for asymmetric key operations such as encryption, 
decryption, signing, and verifying that allow passage of the data to be operated 
upon. This capability makes remote authentication of a device possible. It 
enables accurate, consistent, and electronic identification of Cisco products for 
asset management, provisioning, version visibility, service entitlement, quality 
feedback, and inventory management. (See Figure 2.)
Figure 2. SUDI Immutable Device Identity
Highly Secure Storage
The Cisco Trust Anchor module provides highly secure storage for keys, 
passwords, customer credentials, and other critical security information for the 
device. One of its advantages is the ability to store private encryption keys and 
passwords for even greater security. Allocating secure storage outside the Trust 
Anchor module is also possible.
Random Number Generation and 
Entropy Source
Strong random number generation (RNG) is at the core of encryption, while 
weak RNG can undermine the entire encryption system. Random number 
generators play a key role in creating cryptographic keys, in establishing 
highly secure communications between users and websites, and in resetting 
passwords for email accounts. Without assured randomness, an attacker can 
predict what the system will generate and undermine the algorithm. The Cisco 
Trust Anchor module is compliant with NIST specifications and provides a NIST 
SP 800-90A and B certifiable RNG that extracts entropy from a true random 
source within the Trust Anchor.
© 2024 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.


--- Page 5 ---

Cisco Trustworthy Technologies Data Sheet
Cisco Public
Feature
Description
Benefits
Trustworthy technologies
An evolving range of security technologies designed into 
Cisco Networking devices that protect against counterfeit 
and software modification and verify that Cisco products are 
operating as intended.  Trustworthy technologies include 
image signing, secure boot, and runtime defenses in addition 
to security capabilities in the Trust Anchor module such as 
Random Number Generation (RNG) and crypto support, 
secure storage, and Secure Unique Device Identifier (SUDI).
•
Verifies that hardware is genuine Cisco
•
Protects against counterfeit and software modification
•
Supports secure, encrypted communications
•
Helps to enable device authentication and zero-touch
provisioning, reduces to deployment costs
Image signing
Image signing is a two-step process for creating a unique 
digital signature for a given block of code.  First, a hashing 
algorithm, similar to a checksum, is used to compute a hash 
value of the block of code.  The hash is then encrypted with 
a Cisco private key, resulting in a digital signature that is 
attached to and delivered with the image. Signed images 
may be checked at runtime to verify that the software has not 
been modified.
Cryptographically signed images:
•
Help ensure that the firmware, Basic Input Output
System (BIOS), and other software are authentic and
unmodified
•
Provided a critical check so only genuine, unmodified
software can boot on a Cisco device
•
Effectively mitigate persistent attacks
Secure boot
Cisco Secure Boot helps to ensure that the code that 
executes on Cisco hardware platforms is authentic and 
unmodified.  Cisco hardware-anchored secure boot protects 
the microloader (the first piece of code that boots) in 
tamper-resistant hardware, establishing a root of trust that 
helps prevent Cisco network devices from executing tainted 
network software.
•
Automated check of software integrity at boot-up
•
Monitors the startup process and can shut down the
boot process if it detects a compromise
•
Helps to ensure that only genuine, unmodified software
boots on a Cisco platform
Trust Anchor module (TAm)
This proprietary, tamper-resistant chip is found in many 
Cisco products and features non-volatile secure storage, 
SUDI, and crypto services, including RNG, key store, and 
crypto engine.
•
X.509 SUDI certificate installed at manufacturing
provides a unique device identity
•
SUDI helps to enable anti-counterfeit checks, along with
authentication and remote provisioning
•
Secure, on-board storage
•
RNG/crypto services support secure communications
Hardware authenticity check
A process that uses the X.509 SUDI certificate installed in 
the Trust Anchor module to verify that Cisco hardware is 
authentic (manufactured by Cisco). The hardware 
authenticity check runs only after the secure boot process 
has been completed and the software has been verified to 
be trusted.
•
Verifies hardware authenticity
•
Protects against counterfeit
Runtime defenses
Runtime defenses target injection attacks of malicious code 
into running software, Cisco runtime defenses include 
Address Space Layout Randomization (ASLR), Built-in Object 
Size Checking (BOSC), and X-space Runtime defenses are 
complementary.
•
Makes it harder or impossible for attackers to exploit
vulnerabilities in running software
•
Runtime defenses are complementary; you can
implement these individually or deploy several runtime
defenses together
© 2024 Cisco and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved. Cisco and the Cisco logo are trademarks or registered trademarks of Cisco and/or its affiliates in the U.S. and other countries. To view a list 
of Cisco trademarks, go to this URL: www.cisco.com/go/trademarks. Third-party trademarks mentioned are the property of their respective owners. The use of the word partner does not imply 
a partnership relationship between Cisco and any other company. (1110R)
